.TH FORENSIC_COPY 1 "2026-04-09" "Forensic_Copy 1.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
forensic_copy \- forensically sound file copy with cryptographic hash verification
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B forensic_copy
.B \-\-source
.I path
[\fB\-\-source\fR \fIpath\fR \&...]
.B \-\-destination
.I path
[\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
.B forensic_copy
.I source destination
[\fIoptions\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B forensic_copy
copies one or more source directories or files to a destination, computing and
verifying cryptographic hashes to confirm bit-for-bit integrity.  It preserves
file timestamps (access time, modification time, and birthtime/creation time on
macOS and Windows), Unix permissions, ownership, and extended attributes
(\fBxattr\fR(1) on Unix).
.PP
Files are copied in parallel using the Rayon thread pool.  A streaming
single-pass implementation hashes data during the copy so the source file is
read only once.  For files 100\ MiB and larger an additional per-file progress
bar is displayed.
.PP
In
.B iCloud Production
mode the tool performs a three-way chain-of-custody comparison: each file's
computed hash is checked against both the locally computed destination hash and
the SHA-256 hash provided by Apple in the
.I account-download-details.csv
production-download manifest.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Sources and Destination
.TP
.BI \-\-source " path"
Source file or directory to copy.  May be specified multiple times to copy
several sources into the same destination in a single invocation.
.TP
.BI \-\-destination " path"
Destination directory.  Created automatically if it does not exist.
.TP
.IR source " " destination
Legacy positional form accepted for backwards compatibility.  Equivalent to
.BR "\-\-source " \fIsource\fR " \-\-destination " \fIdestination\fR .
.SS Hashing
.TP
.BI \-\-hash " algorithm"
Select the hashing algorithm.  Valid values:
.RS
.IP \fBsha256\fR 10
SHA-256 (default).
.IP \fBblake3\fR 10
BLAKE3 with Rayon-accelerated parallelism for large files.
.IP \fBmd5\fR 10
MD5.  Not recommended for forensic work; included for legacy compatibility.
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-no-hash
Skip hashing entirely.  Copy is performed with
.BR fs::copy (3)
and no integrity check is done.  Mutually exclusive with
.BR \-\-no-verify .
.TP
.B \-\-no-verify
Hash the source file during the copy pass but do not re-hash the destination
for verification.  The destination hash is reported as
.BR N/A .
Faster than full mode but provides no copy-integrity guarantee.  Mutually
exclusive with
.BR \-\-no-hash .
.SS Conflict Handling
.TP
.BI \-\-on-conflict " mode"
Action when a destination file already exists.  Default:
.BR skip .
Valid values:
.RS
.IP \fBskip\fR 12
Skip the file if the destination exists
.I and
size, modification time, and hash all match the source.  If any attribute
differs the file is overwritten.
.IP \fBoverwrite\fR 12
Always overwrite existing destination files.
.IP \fBabort\fR 12
Abort the entire operation immediately if
.I any
destination file already exists.
.RE
.SS Speed Control
.TP
.BI \-\-speed " mode"
Controls the Rayon thread pool size used for parallel file copying and hashing.
Default:
.BR full .
Valid values:
.RS
.IP \fBfull\fR 10
Use all logical CPU cores.
Maximum throughput.
.IP \fBhalf\fR 10
Use half the logical CPU cores (minimum 1).
Leaves resources available for other processes running on the same machine.
.IP \fBslow\fR 10
Use a single thread.
Minimal impact on the host system; recommended when copying from a live
evidence machine where I/O contention must be kept low.
.RE
.PP
Speed controls both file-copy parallelism and BLAKE3 large-file hashing
parallelism, which also uses Rayon internally.  Choosing
.B slow
guarantees that at most one file and one hash operation run at a time.
.SS Reporting
.TP
.B \-\-report
Print a detailed forensic report to standard output after the copy completes.
.TP
.BI \-\-report-path " path"
Write the forensic report to
.I path
instead of standard output.  Implies
.BR \-\-report .
.SS iCloud Production Mode
.TP
.B \-\-icloud
Enable iCloud Production mode.  Forces
.B \-\-hash sha256
and full verification regardless of other flags.  The tool will search each
source directory recursively for a file whose name ends in
.I \-account-download-details.csv
and use it as the Apple hash manifest.  Cannot be combined with
.B \-\-no-hash
or
.BR \-\-no-verify .
.TP
.BI \-\-icloud-csv " path"
Provide the Apple production CSV explicitly instead of relying on
auto-detection.  Requires
.BR \-\-icloud .
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Basic copy (SHA-256, full verification)
.nf
forensic_copy --source /Volumes/Evidence --destination /mnt/working/Evidence
.fi
.SS Copy with BLAKE3 hashing
.nf
forensic_copy --source /Volumes/Evidence --destination /mnt/working/Evidence \\
    --hash blake3
.fi
.SS Skip verification (hash source only, faster)
.nf
forensic_copy --source /Volumes/Evidence --destination /mnt/working/Evidence \\
    --no-verify
.fi
.SS Copy without any hashing
.nf
forensic_copy --source /Volumes/Evidence --destination /mnt/working/Evidence \\
    --no-hash
.fi
.SS Multiple sources into one destination with a written report
.nf
forensic_copy \\
    --source /Volumes/Phone/DCIM \\
    --source /Volumes/Phone/Downloads \\
    --destination /mnt/case01 \\
    --report-path /mnt/case01/forensic_report.txt
.fi
.SS Overwrite existing files and abort on conflict (separate invocations)
.nf
# Overwrite mode:
forensic_copy --source /Volumes/USB --destination /mnt/dest \\
    --on-conflict overwrite

# Abort if destination already has any matching filename:
forensic_copy --source /Volumes/USB --destination /mnt/dest \\
    --on-conflict abort
.fi
.SS iCloud Production mode with auto-detected CSV
.nf
forensic_copy --source /Users/examiner/Downloads/iCloud_export \\
    --destination /mnt/case01/icloud \\
    --icloud \\
    --report-path /mnt/case01/icloud_chain_report.txt
.fi
.SS iCloud Production mode with explicit CSV path
.nf
forensic_copy --source /Users/examiner/Downloads/iCloud_export \\
    --destination /mnt/case01/icloud \\
    --icloud \\
    --icloud-csv /path/to/abc123-account-download-details.csv \\
    --report-path /mnt/case01/icloud_chain_report.txt
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B forensic_copy
does not use explicit non-zero exit codes in the current release.  All
diagnostic messages (argument errors, copy failures, hash mismatches) are
printed to standard output.  Hash mismatch is recorded per-file in the results
and report but does not affect the process exit status.
.PP
.TP
.B 0
Normal exit in all cases, including when individual file copies fail or hashes
do not match.  Check the console output or report for per-file results.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I <destination>/<source-name>/
Directory tree created by a directory-source copy.  Mirrors the source tree
rooted at the source directory's base name.
.TP
.I <path>
Forensic report file written when
.B \-\-report-path
is supplied.  Plain-text format.
.TP
.I *-account-download-details.csv
Apple iCloud production download manifest searched for automatically when
.B \-\-icloud
is used.  Must contain columns
.B File_Name
and
.BR GPG_SHA256 .
.SH NOTES
.SS Forensic integrity
Copy and hash are performed in a single streaming pass so the source is read
exactly once per file.  Verification (re-hash of the destination) is a separate
pass and only performed in default
.I Full
mode.  Use
.B \-\-no-hash
only when hash integrity is not required.  MD5 is provided solely for
interoperability with legacy workflows; SHA-256 or BLAKE3 are preferred for
forensic purposes.
.SS Metadata preservation
On macOS, access time, modification time, birthtime (via
.BR setattrlist (2)),
Unix permissions, ownership (
.BR chown (2)),
and extended attributes are preserved.  On Windows, creation time is set via
.BR SetFileTime .  On Linux, birthtime preservation is not supported and logs a
per-file metadata warning; all other attributes are preserved.  Metadata errors
are non-fatal and counted separately from copy/hash failures.
.SS AppleDouble (._) files
Files whose names begin with
.B ._
are excluded from the copy.  These are AppleDouble resource-fork sidecar files
created by macOS HFS+ on non-HFS volumes and rarely contain evidentiary data.
.SS Rayon parallelism
The copy loop uses a Rayon thread pool sized by the
.B \-\-speed
flag:
.B full
(all logical CPUs, default),
.B half
(half of logical CPUs, minimum 1), or
.B slow
(single thread).
All destination directories are pre-created before the parallel loop begins to
prevent race conditions.  Progress output uses the
.B indicatif
multi-progress renderer; per-file progress bars appear only for files larger
than 100\ MiB.
.SS iCloud Production chain of custody
When
.B \-\-icloud
is active the tool enforces SHA-256 full-verify mode and performs three
comparisons per file:
.IP \(bu 4
Source hash vs Apple CSV hash — detects in-transit or local corruption.
.IP \(bu 4
Destination hash vs source hash — confirms copy integrity.
.IP \(bu 4
Full chain: source hash == destination hash == Apple CSV hash.
.PP
Files listed in the Apple CSV but absent from disk are reported as
.IR "missing evidence" .
Files on disk but absent from the Apple CSV are flagged
.IR "not in Apple CSV" .
.SH AUTHOR
Christopher (hiddenchameleon).
.PP
.I Note:
no
.B authors
field is present in
.IR Cargo.toml ;
attribution is taken from the repository commit identity.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dd (1),
.BR shasum (1),
.BR b3sum (1),
.BR xattr (1),
.BR mandb (8),
.BR makewhatis (8)
